Since the early days of the pandemic, attention has focused on producing a vaccine for COVID-19. With one, it’s hoped it will be able to suppress the virus without relying purely on economically challenging control measures. Without one, the world will probably have to live with COVID-19 as an endemic disease. It’s unlikely the coronavirus will naturally burn itself out. With so much at stake, it’s not surprising that COVID-19 vaccines have become both a public and political obsession. The good news is that making one is possible: the virus has the right characteristics to be fended off with a vaccine, and the economic incentive exists to get one (or indeed several) developed. But we need to be patient. Creating a new medicine requires a large amount of thought and scrutiny to make sure what’s produced is safe and effective. Researchers must be careful not to allow the pressure and allure of creating a vaccine quickly to undermine the integrity of their work. The upshot may be that we don’t have a highly effective vaccine against COVID-19 for some time. Here, authors from across The Conversation outline what we know so far. Drawing upon their expertise, they explain how a COVID-19 vaccine will work, the progress a leading vaccine (developed by the University of Oxford with AstraZeneca) is making, and what challenges there will be to manufacturing and rolling a vaccine out when ready. How will vaccines work for COVID-19? 
How the spike protein is produced
The benefits of different designs
Why boosters may be needed
What determines how we respond to vaccines
Why vaccines provide strong immunity
How to use a vaccine when it’s available How is the Oxford vaccine being developed, tested and approved? 
The many steps of vaccine development
The results of phase 1 and phase 2 trials
How the phase 3 trial will work
Why testing was paused – and why we shouldn’t be alarmed
Why vaccine makers need to be more open
Why we need to know what’s in placebos How will the vaccine be made and rolled out? 
How to prepare enough vaccines for the whole world
How tobacco could play a role in producing a vaccine
Why vaccines need to be kept cold
Will rich countries buy up the supply when vaccines are available?
How to stop rich countries from depriving poorer ones
Who should get a vaccine first? How do you counter resistance and scepticism? 
Vaccine hesitancy is nothing new
Are anti-vaxxers that big a problem?
How the far right is exploiting the pandemic
How to build trust in vaccines  Producing the spike protein   The pros and cons of different designs   Boosters may be needed   What governs how we respond to vaccines?   Why vaccines provide strong immunity   How to use a vaccine when it’s available   The many steps of vaccine development   Phase 1 and phase 2 trials are successful   How the phase 3 trial works   Testing was paused – and that’s OK   But vaccine makers need to be more open   Why we need to know what’s in placebos   Preparing enough for the whole world   Tobacco – an unexpected ally?   Keeping vaccines cool will be crucial   ‘Vaccine nationalism’ threatens universal access   How to counter vaccine nationalism   Who will get the coronavirus vaccine first?   Public resistance is a sizeable problem – but nothing new   Are anti-vaxxers a problem?   The far right is exploiting the pandemic   How to build trust in vaccines  The future is full of possibility. COVID-19, Sars, Mers and the common cold are all caused by coronaviruses, and scientists are considering whether it’s possible to create a vaccine that could offer protection against them all – and perhaps even against an as yet unknown coronavirus we’re yet to encounter. Admittedly, having a vaccine that can do this seems unlikely in the near future. We shouldn’t get ahead of ourselves, though, says Sarah Pitt. No vaccine has yet completed its safety trials, and we can’t yet be sure that any vaccine will permanently prevent people from catching COVID-19. We need to prepare ourselves for the very real possibility that a COVID-19 vaccine only reduces the severity of symptoms or provides temporary protection.